art/table

When Jessie and I left Oregon, we decided to leave our table, which had been a gift from a friend. It wasn’t particularly big or sturdy, and we were looking for an upgrade anyway. Although we did find that upgrade eventually (in the form of a monstrous, 200 lb banquet table that Jessie picked up from a thrift store for $30), we were table-less for quite some time. At some point, after eating on the floor for long enough, we decided to cave in and get a wooden table with collapsing legs from Target. We used it as our main dinner table for a while, but once we got the banquet table, it sat forlornly folded up in the garage.

We had a friend with a small studio apartment in Portland, and he had a little fold-up table that he would hang on the wall, so that it was out of the way. He’d only bring it down when he had friends visiting and needed to serve a meal. We thought that this was a great idea, and that we could make our table double as a nice piece of art. You can do this with any fold-up table - we paid around $50 for ours, but you can find plenty of card tables at garage sales, thrift stores, or on Craigslist.

An earlier revamping of the table saw it painted a nice yellow on the top, but we painted over this and the legs with a white primer. Once that had dried, we laid out a grid on the top of the table, and sketched out what we wanted. Our bedroom has a bit of a nautical theme to it, and we thought it would be fun to paint some sort of ocean scene. We ended up sketching out a big crashing wave in pencil.

Painting on a table is actually a lot of fun, because the canvas is at just the right height. We got out our green, blue, black, and white acrylics, some cardboard for mixing on, and a bunch of old brushes of all different types. You don’t really want to use expensive paints for this project - a table is a big surface to cover, and you want to get pretty messy. Because we were painting water, what worked for us was to just keep painting over top of the drying underlayers, allowing us to mix everything together. We started with both foam and bristle brushes, and eventually also brought fingers and hands into the mix, along with some sponges for sea foam. The boat in the center wasn’t originally planned, but it gives the painting a bit of a foreboding air. All in all, it only took us about 45 minutes to paint the entire top of the table, as we didn’t want to let anything dry too much. After we were sure the top had dried, we taped it up and painted the sides and legs black. 

Next, we wanted to give it a more finished look, as well as protect it in case we decided to use it as a table again. We decided to cover it with a plate of ¼” clear plexiglass, which is relatively inexpensive and easy to work with. Fortunately, we live near TAP Plastics, which is a great place that will cut all sorts of plastics for you. If you don’t happen to live near a store that sells sheets of plexiglass, you can usually find something at a big box store like Lowe’s or Home Depot, or you could use glass instead.

One thing we had considered was setting the plexiglass above the table about 1” with metal standoffs, but we decided against it because we would have needed a much thicker sheet to keep it from sagging in the middle, and we wanted the profile when it was hung up to be pretty small. If you do decide to do this, you should either use glass, or something like ⅜” or ½” plexiglass. Instead, we used elevator bolts, which have a really pleasing shape to them. We took the legs off of the table, clamped the plexiglass sheet to the top of the table and then awkwardly maneuvered it around on the drill press table to make straight holes through both the plexiglass and the table top. You could easily use a handheld drill for this, but I don’t trust myself to drill a vertical hole (and using a drill press is so much fun!)

Finally, we bolted the plexiglass onto the table with the elevator bolts and some washers and nuts, and then reassembled the whole thing.

For hanging on the wall, we cut a piece of wood that fit nicely between the lip of the table and the folded up leg. We screwed this into two studs in the wall (if your table is pretty heavy like ours, you’ll want to make sure that you use heavy duty drywall anchors or just get it into two studs). The table apron is deep enough that it sits very securely on the wood fixture.

We also made and attached some straps with snap buttons to keep the legs from folding out while moving it or taking it on and off the wall.

So, how does it work? It’s really nice to see it on our wall, and it still functions well as a table. The plexiglass is pretty resilient and doesn’t get too scratched up, and it protects the art underneath nicely from food and spills (it is possible to get liquid between the plexiglass and the tabletop - be careful to wipe it out of there if that does happen)

Let us know if you make an art/table of your own - we’d love to see your design!