I really like this focus on reward functions and how that relates to the experience of being and learning to be a manager. The focus on both type-of-work and timescales is key for that experience and I recall being hard to really get comfortable with. To the extent of focusing on the internal reward functions, I think this captures some of the important mechanics.

Where I struggle with in this article is the gap in discussion about the context around the reward function rewiring. You hint at this with your comment on the painful process of rewiring, but I think it might be worth it to say a little more. The shift from IC to manager creates interesting changes in the understanding of agency, which strongly impacts the ability to tune their reward functions. The article implies that the manager’s job is to create a great team culture and team that can accomplish get the right thing done. In practice, this is in an environment of unclear resources, boundaries, and shifting responsibilities.

I think the biological metaphor of gene expression captures how I see this. While a given genome (manager) has a number of functions, only some are visibly expressed due to the environment surrounding the genome. Without modification to the environment, parts of the genome may never express.

For me this maps to the ecological psychology idea of affordance-effectivity fit. New managers at each level spend a fair bit of energy trying to discover boundaries and methods for activating agency. If the environment doesn’t provide an affordance, for example, there is a hiring freeze, the manager doesn’t have the opportunity to develop the effectivity of knowing how to hire and shape a team. Or at least not with the same tools at hand as someone that isn’t subject to a hiring freeze. These environmental constraints happen in less dramatic cases as well, where it may be assumed that the new manager knows to do something and is only given loose guidance to run the team, with most 1:1s being focused on smaller issues on the immediate horizon. I believe this happens because being a manager is frequently informal and loose training, and suffers when a new manager’s own manager has loose ideas about how to cultivate the effectivities (ability to respond to affordance).

At MB we’ve been able to see some of these environmental challenges manifest as we’ve embarked on the organizational changes that redefined us from Sales driven Feature-factory style work where PMs handed down decisions, to a culture that strives towards a balanced triad of product, design, and development. My observation is that this has led to gaps in developing those managerial reward functions. The environment signals for value–delivering on roadmap commitments, that are still largely PM driven–may be at odds with the manager’s reward function of ensuring delivery quality and growth of their team, while also calibrating to new relationships with their counterparts, that are themselves uncovering new roles.

On a personal note, one of the things you did that I found eye-opening and incredibly valuable was when you provided a concrete frame using “Good looks like …” statements. I had never had that kind of direct accountability frame provided, and it took some time to grow into a better understanding of it. That is one of my favorite tools to use now for creating clarity in my own thinking as a manager about how to drive success for my team. This was an environmental frame change, and I’m looking to replicate the practice as virally as possible :-)

So, if it augments instead of diluting the discussion of the article, it may be worth adding something about the need to care for the environment around a manager in helping them succeed at remapping their reward functions.

Thank you for the inclusion and opportunity to provide feedback,
